Reuven, welcome back to Talk By The Nome.
How are you doing?
I'm doing great.
Great to be back here.
Nice to see you.
Yeah, it's great to see you as well.
I'm a little concerned though.
There's some possibilities that maybe my Facebook ads are going to get messed up.
We are talking about pandas and pandas internationally.
And I heard that you're some kind of animal trafficker.
You want to start the show with that story? It's out of control.
It is the craziest story. So I occasionally advertise on Facebook, advertise my Pandas and Python training.
And I guess it was like two years ago, I tried doing a little bit more advertising.
And basically, I didn't really pay much attention to it until about a year ago when I noticed that when I tried to do some more advertising and it said, you are not allowed to advertise on any meta properties.
that's really weird like what did i do i looked i could not find any indication of what i'd done
wrong so it says if you want to appeal click here so i clicked here and within 30 minutes or so i
get email back saying your appeal has been checked and denied you will never be allowed to advertise
on any meta property again and this was like what have i done like what in the world i feel like i'm
pretty innocent just some courses and some books come on man i'd like i figure also i appealed
someone must have looked through this. Anyway, in poking around online, someone said to me,
oh, I was caught by the same thing. It is illegal to sell rare and endangered animals. And they
believe that since you were selling Python and Pandas training, then you must have been training
in live and endangered animals and thus you are banned for life. Well, I said, you know what? I
got some, first of all, like nuts and yet a great story to tell to my machine learning classes. So
good on that front. But I was like, this is easy to resolve, right? I'll just contact someone.
Facebook. No one's available. I text on my connections, like people I know who work there,
and I finally get the answer back saying that for legal purposes, they delete all data that's more
than six months old, something like that. So they could not go back and check to see why I was banned,
and thus this ban really would be for life. So because I waited a while, because it'd been like
a year between the ban and me noticing, so they couldn't do anything about it. So I was like
half laughing and half like, you got to be kidding me about this. And I posted on my blog about this
and you guys picked it up on Python Bytes. It was picked up in a bunch of other places like Hacker
News. And about a month later, I checked and it was back. No one told me anything. No one said
anything. Just magically and quietly, my account was restored. Running to the press never helps.
That's right. That's right. But it was so absurd. And I think it was at least like four senior engineers at Facebook who tried to help me with this. And they were all like, we tried. There's nothing we can do.
Crazy. It reminds me, honestly, it reminds me so much of my app store review experience,
getting the new Talk Python training mobile apps in iOS, in the iOS app store, in the Google app store.
They were tragically incompetent in their own special way, right?
somewhat malicious, somewhat not malicious, just like, for example, Apple,
I think it was Apple. It could have been, I don't know. Apple or Google has to be one of them
said, you know, we've denied your application to publish this application
because you're trying to impersonate in an existing one. I said, what app am I trying?
What am I trying to impersonate? Like it's hundreds of hours of stuff that we've created.
like they're like well first you might be hijacked so so what this is well in the description it says
if you want to learn python you can take our courses well there's already an app called learn
python and you're trying to impersonate i'm like what they're like it said if you want to learn
python but there's an app called learn python i'm like i just i don't even under like my mind is
how do you read that description and think this is a trademark app called like eat at a restaurant
than no food ordery ordered delivery price review.
Yeah, you're going to be acquired by Uber Eats straight away.
Exactly.
And so we went, but you would think, okay, fair mistake.
Like, yeah, yeah, okay, something caught it.
Just like you said, a simple request and a human will look and it'll be fine.
No, they're like, well, look, obviously you're doing this.
I'm like, obviously, let's try another scenario.
What if I said I wanted to learn to play the guitar
and there was an app called Learn Guitar, but I don't want to learn.
It's not, the title is not Learn Guitar.
just the act of learning a guitar how else would you explain it like oh okay so I guess we see
we understand now you can you can have that sentence and it's just it these things are really
and you're at the at the complete mercy of them it's it's really it's both like comically funny
but it's also like painful because we spent four months building that app they wouldn't accept for
this stupid reason you know and they're taking a fair amount of money off the top for whatever
people are earning from these apps. It's not like this is a charity or something. What I found
amazing with Facebook was there was literally no way to contact a human being. Like I tried all
sorts of searches and forums and on, on and on. And I found a lot of other people who had been
caught up in this sort of ridiculous situation, but like, there's no form even to say,
hey, I think you made a mistake.
Why don't you have a human look at this?
Because that would cost them too much, you know, someone's salary.
Yeah, absolutely.
Anyway, I don't want to spend too much time on it.
But boy, is that a crazy story?
And I mean, we're going to be trading in some pandas today.
And so I'm going to bleep that.
Every time the word pandas is said, we're bleeping it out on the YouTube version.
Well, this could be entertaining then.
Wow.
Ruben was really testy.
Like all those bleeps, what are you saying?
No, seriously though, let's catch up.
We'll talk about your book.
What have you been up to since the last time we spoke?
I can't remember the last time I had you on.
It's been a couple of years, I think.
- It's been some time, yeah.
So I'm continuing to do Python pandas training companies.
Since the pandemic, much more of it is online
just because companies are now used to doing stuff
on Zoom, Team, WebEx rather than bringing me there in person.
That's fine.
So I travel to conferences rather than to clients.
And it sort of extended my flexibility on that.
And I've also been building up my online training stuff,
both a whole lot of courses.
And I've got an online bootcamp that I run for Python and Pandas twice a year.
The big thing, which is actually connected to what we're doing here also,
is I have a new newsletter called Bamboo Weekly,
where I have Pandas exercises.
Sort of like the same style as the book,
But every week I take a topic and I do it based on current events.
So if there's something going on in the news, I try to find a data set, a real world data set that has something to do with that.
And then we try to experiment with that.
Yeah, that sounds really fun to see like a real world example every week.
Yeah, yeah.
So people are like, how do you come up with that?
And I say, well, I listen to a lot of podcasts and I read a lot of newspapers and something somewhere.
Like I read The Economist, for example, and they had this short, cute article about the number of animals that go through Heathrow Airport every year.
I was like, wait, there's got to be a data set for that.
And sure enough, the Heathrow Airport Authority publishes a data set in CSV of how many animals go through.
And it was like 200 horses and one and a half billion butterflies and everything in between.
And so it was great fun to sort of play with that data and ask questions about it and give
people practice with something that's dirty and messy.
I don't mean the animals being dirty, right?
Like they're messy.
Like you need to like really, you know, wrestle with it because that's the only way you're
going to improve.
So I'm, I'm having a lot of fun on all the training front.
I definitely see more and more use of, I'm sure this won't surprise you, more and more
use of Python in the data space as it just like catches fire there.
Yeah.
It's just going downhill, picking up speed, isn't it?
It's extraordinary.
Like I still remember asking people in my intro Python courses, so what are you here for?
They're like, yeah, my company's thinking of doing some stuff with data analysis and pandas.
Or at least data analysis.
I think it was then even in NumPy before pandas came out.
And me thinking, hmm, I should really learn this stuff because it sounds like it's going to be popular.
And holy cow, it's like everywhere.
the whole ecosystem is just growing and growing and growing it's like people are sort of seeing pandas
as the like underlying infrastructure on which they build their software tools and their companies
even right or even the thing that defines the api on which they can innovate right i think dask or
a whole bunch of other things in that space right that if you know pandas chances are if you're not
too crazy you can like do grid computing by changing the import extraordinary just extraordinary
Yeah. Yeah, it absolutely is. And so back to your newsletter, Pandas Eat Bamboo. Is that right?
That's so-
Well, I understand why you're banned from Facebook. Okay.
It was actually my father's idea. I was like, I need to have like a catchy name for something.
And so he was like, "Well, what was something with bamboo?" I was like, "Right, right." It's like,
you know, it's food for thought and food for pandas.
Yeah, that's awesome. Yeah, that's actually really clever. I like it a lot. I like it a lot.
So you've been on a journey.
You've been on a journey to write a book, right?
Yes.
I was convinced to do a second one.
Right.
So I did a book with Manning called Python Workout, which was exercising Python.
And when that finished, they said, so what other topics do you think would be useful?
I said, well, doing a lot of pandas and people definitely need a lot of exercise and a lot
of practice in that.
And so I got to work both collecting the exercises I do with my corporate training and also like coming up with some new ones as I learn new things.
Because this is so, so, so huge that it's very easy to get lost in there and not even know what are the important topics to learn.
And so thanks to like working with people all the time, I sort of see also where they get stuck and where they have problems and where it's really confusing to them.
So, yeah.
So 200 and some odd exercises later.
By the way, I'll just tell you, why did it come out when it came out?
Because I'm terribly bad at deadlines.
I said to the Manning people, I really want to have it at my booth at PyCon.
They said, okay, big talker.
You want it mid-May, huh?
So you'd better have everything done.
They sort of backtracked on the calendar and said, okay, so you better have the whole thing done by December.
And then finally I had some fire under me and got it done.
I suppose to.
Awesome.
I should get more done.
Yeah, the version I actually have in my Apple Books here I pulled up is the Manning Early Access Preview version, but it's out for real now, yeah?
Here, I've even got the paper copy here.
What?
I know, I know.
That's a pretty hefty book, honestly.
That's a proper book.
I know, I know.
It's really quite some feeling there to see.
Yeah.
I guess I really finished it.
Congratulations.
So I wanted to talk to you about maybe just kind of falling on with your bamboo idea.
Give us some examples.
Give us some problems that people are solving with pandas.
And I mean, we're not going to talk through the code super detailed, but you could say
like this aspect or this feature of pandas like.loc or whatever is how you access and
solve these problems, right?
So just kind of exploring that space.
I had Wes McKinney on four or five episodes ago, something like that.
And now it's just like, how do you learn pandas?
It's like so big, you know?
So I've actually changed.
Well, let me first say, I'm definitely one of those people who thinks you should learn
Python before pandas.
Like, I definitely think that knowing the language well will serve you very, very well
in all sorts of weird, small ways necessarily.
But at the same time, when you learn pandas, you have to learn that some of the paradigms
you learned like some of the idioms from Python are not appropriate.
So I was giving a class in like optimizing pandas, like a short class,
we'll call it micro class, like 90 minutes long, about a year or so ago.
And at the end I was like, oh, and by the way,
obviously just never do for loops.
And everyone's like, wait, wait, wait, what?
I said, what do you mean what?
And they were like, we were taught in our intro pandas class
that you should do a for loop to do anything across the data frame.
And I was like, okay, what?
I'll give this feed.
And so people think that because it's in Python, you should do it the same way.
But there are all these different idioms, especially whole vectorization that you need to internalize.
Otherwise, as I like to say to people, you should hope to be paid by the hour because like these things are just going to take forever to run.
And so people don't necessarily understand sort of how to approach Panda stuff.
And then they don't understand sort of, let's see, I mean, I'll give like outline and then we can sort of go into it.
Certainly how to access things with.lock.
Certainly how multi-indexes work.
How to work with the different D types.
Because these are things that we don't think about in the standard pandas world each day.
The closest analogy would maybe be that where you're working with a dictionary, you want to think about what your keys are going to be.
But even then, it doesn't come close to it.
So like.lock, people are like, so fine.
So.lock is used for retrieving from a series
or retrieving from a data frame.
But it's so much more than that
because you have two parts to it,
or potentially two parts.
You have the row selector
and you have the column selector.
And each of those can be an individual name,
a list of names, a Boolean series,
or even a Lambda.
And you can mix and match those in so many different ways.
And once you see those options,
like your head sort of explodes with, oh, wait,
I never thought that I could access my data like that.
And then you're like, wait,
you can also assign to your data like that.
And then they're just sort of astonished.
Yeah, it's really wild.
You know, I think pandas has its own idiomatic style
that is different than what you would call pythonic, right?
Like it's pandonic.
I don't know what the name is.
Idiomatic pandas, right?
where there's things that are specific to pandas, like this vectorization stuff, right?
Instead of looping over, right, you know, you think about the Python performance angles,
or the data science performance angles, right? A lot of the speed that we get out of tools like
pandas and numpy and polars and others is because you take the data, you push it down into some
native layer, and you just leave it there. And you tell you kind of speak to the native layer
from Python and you say, deep down in your insides, you got this thing, multiply all 1 million of them
by two or whatever, right? But if you loop over it, you're like, kind of running it out of C into,
into, you know, Python objects, then you're operating, then you're putting it back,
like just, you know, 2 million times, all of a sudden, all those benefits are gone. And so
certainly learning those types of things. I mean, the vectorization, I think most people get pretty
soon although it sounds like not necessarily everyone flabbergasted but there's way more than
that right there's there's a whole that's just probably the most obvious thing right right i
mean so like accessing things in that way by the way you asked before like how should people even
approach learning pandas and so i've started thinking about a little differently based on
feedback from people that i would sort of walk through it okay here's a series here's a data
frame and after creating some fake ones with made up numbers or random numbers, then we'll
start reading in files and then we'll do this and then we'll get to visualization.
And a student of mine said, you know, you're sort of missing the big, like people miss
the big picture doing that and they want to get the excitement.
Why don't you start with read a CSV file, visualize it right there inside of Jupyter
and then people will be so impressed and amazed and then you fill in the gaps.
And so I started doing that a bit.
And I think that has not been a bad approach to catch their attention, give them a sense
of what the possibilities are.
I'm like, okay, let's now walk through each of these little pieces and build up to what
we saw that first day.
And that's been fun.
Yeah, I totally agree.
That's also something that I really strive for and don't always do whenever I'm doing
presentations.
But just because someone has chosen to sit in a seat for a day-long course or an hour-long
presentation doesn't mean that they couldn't use a little inspiration right and if you're like wow
you did those three lines and now we have this picture and i understand all that like tell me
more right that right there that's right now you have their actual attention the whole time and
they're enjoying it and it's yeah it's yeah so often there's like well in order to show you the
nice stuff i got to give you every level of details like no you don't you're gonna you're gonna make
I can't believe it that way.
That's right. You mentioned three lines of code.
One of the amazing things about pandas is how often you can write very,
very little code, but it's getting to that code,
that takes a while really taking advantage of it.
We've been knowing that it's possible.
Right?
Right. People don't even know.
A lot of times I've been using it now for
long enough that I sort of intuit,
oh, there's got to be a method that does this.
It's like someone has encountered this problem before.
And so either there's a method or there's an option or there's an add-on,
like something somewhere that just makes it trivially easy.
And that's part of the exploration that I try to do both in the book,
in my training general.
And also, truth be told, I'm constantly learning stuff, right?
Like it's rare for me to teach and not discover some option or some method
that I did not know about because it's just so incredibly vast.
Yeah.
Or Pandas 2 comes out or something like that.
Yes.
Yes, indeed. I mean, I've been exploring, I mean, tomorrow, tomorrow I head off to Prague for
EuroPython where I'm giving a talk on PyArrow in Pandas. And so I've been looking into that a lot
and oh boy, right. I mean, I've been using it for say a year or so, but it's amazing. And yet there
are all these subtle changes that are happening in Pandas as a result that you need to know about,
you need to expect when you use it. But it's another like tool in our toolbox that we can pull out
to make pandas more effective more efficient deal with larger data um and also interact with other
and interoperate with other systems yeah it's like sure as i said the whole ecosystem is just
exploding it's really quite something to see yeah it really is and i think the pandas 2 stuff is
going to make a pretty big difference changing like the internals away from just you know
tables of numbers and basically okay uh let's talk about so so the way i thought we could maybe
explore this pandas workout book is let's just pick some fun exercises that you put together
and and talk about them like give us a quick overview of what the workout aspect of this
book means anyway then we'll pick the first one sure so the idea is that you can't learn everything
all at once or quickly that's sort of like you know working out physically it's a long haul and
every day you get a little better, a little stronger, a little more flexible.
And so if you see your PANDAS learning journey as it's going to take me several months, not
it's going to take me a day, then if every day you do a little bit of practice, you learn
something new in some new direction, at the end of that journey, you're going to be able to solve
many, many more problems in better, more idiomatic and more efficient ways. And you'll be able to put
these pieces together in ways that you didn't even expect. So that's the basic idea. And so
the book is divided into, I want to say 12 chapters. I know we sort of rejiggered it at some point
where each chapter focuses on a different aspect of pandas. But it's really sort of the total
experience of going through it. And so we have 200 exercises, plus there's like a, for lack of
a better term, a midterm and a final, like a meteor projects that people can go through that
people ask for after the Python book. And each exercise then has not only the main exercise where
I pose a problem, I give an explanation, I give an answer, note the order. The answer comes at the
end, so you won't peek as easily. We talked about putting it in the back of the book and like,
that just didn't work out so well. So at least you have to wade through the explanation a little
bit or turn the page. And then after- You can buy the one book with the questions.
You can buy the answers later.
i didn't i didn't mean i didn't mean to give anyone ideas i'm joking no no it's fine um and
then like after the answer we have three what we call beyond the exercise which are okay now that
you've kind of gotten the basics let's push either on the same data set or even like sort of
go farther and so it's like that's why we say it's 200 exercises because it's 50 official exercises
and other three for each one.
And those tend to be much harder.
And I don't give a full explanation,
although I do give the solution online in the Jupyter Notebook.
You can download Jupyter for all these things
and see how I solved it.
And for many of them, there's a link to the Pandas Tutor.
I think, yeah, you've definitely spoken to Philip well in the past.
So he is not only a Python Tutor, but Pandas Tutor,
he and his team, it's amazing.
And so you can just click on a link
and it will take you to usually a miniature version of the data set
because it's too big for Pandas Tutor.
and then you can see the visualization of how these things work.
I don't think I talked about Pandas Tutor.
Maybe I have talked to Philip about it,
but I've certainly used it in some of my courses.
But it's worth bringing up just to see how that thing works.
It's something special, this thing.
It really gives you some deep understanding and it's like,
"Okay, if I run this group by command,
then here's how all the pieces flow back together.
You're using this during your book?
Yeah. Every exercise has a link in the solution.
You click on it and brings you to the code that I use.
Usually, again, miniature version of the code,
miniature version of the dataset that you can then
see the visualization there in your browser.
Nice. Yeah, because you've got to
basically encode the data in the URL.
So it can't be too much.
Right, right. So I would like basically take the data in the data frame, turn it into a Python dictionary and then like set it up because it won't work with files for security reasons.
So assign that dictionary to a variable or no, no, I'm sorry, I turned to CSV in a string and then assign that string to a variable and read it in.
And then I would see if it overflowed the pandas work, now pandas tutor limit.
And if it did that sort of iterated until I got it small enough to fit in there and big enough to be useful and interesting.
Yeah.
I took a few iterations.
That's cool.
No, but it's a super, super good resource.
For learning pandas, I also think for exploring, right?
Like you end up with some code that like, I'm not really sure what this does or this is actually new to me.
Like a lot of things you might encounter in this book.
You're like, let me visualize that, right?
Because.
Right, right.
I mean, as I said, like I do a lot of training in Pandas, and very often people have already played with it a bit, used it, even used it for a year or two.
And because it's so large, like it's not unusual for someone to say, oh, I had no idea that this functionality existed.
Why have I been wasting my time doing X and Y and Z?
I'll give you one example that I've been using more and more.
So, you know, Matt Harrison's a big fan of the method chaining approach.
And at first I was like, yeah, yeah, yeah, Matt, whatever.
Like, like, yo, stop pushing everyone.
You and your fluent interfaces.
Right.
And then I was like, actually, this is a great way to build things up little by little, line
by line.
And I can use this.
It's pedagogically very useful because I say, okay, let's think about how we want to break
down this problem.
We'll do this.
Then we'll do this.
And you can see it sort of going line by line until voila, we have the analysis that we
want.
And so I inserted that into a lot of places in the book.
Sort of like one of the last edits that I did was to go back and change it to be more method
chaining.
And I use it now all the time in my training and in the Bamboo Weekly.
And so I bow to Matt on that.
He was right.
And I was stubbornly resistant for no good reason.
Yeah.
I really like that style as well.
You see, it's officially night here where I am.
It's just everything switched up.
I just had that yesterday when I was doing office hours and all of a sudden I was sharing my screen and it changed the color.
I'm not the only one that happens to.
It's funny.
So, yeah, I'm a big fan of the method chaining fluent interfaces.
I mean, I would love to even see like Python itself in the standard library adopt that more, right?
Like there's so many things you operate on that'll change something, but then it'll return, not return anything.
It's like a void method as much as we have those, right?
It returns none effectively.
So you can't say, you know, dot sort, dot this, dot that.
You have to like multi-step it.
And I would just love to see more of it.
But let's talk.
Well, I'll just say there on that front.
So Pandas like does have the option to either get back a new data frame or to say in place
equals true.
And then it does it locally, like it does it on that data structure and then returns
none.
And people are consistently convinced that this is faster, more efficient, better.
And so I've been like trying to tell people, no, the Python core developers keep saying,
do not think that is true.
It is not true.
And we are getting rid of in place equals true at some point.
Stop using it so that you can do method chaining.
And so no small number of people, again, in my course, are like, oh, really?
I had no idea.
So I feel like, you know, I'm spreading the gospel as it were.
Beautiful.
Throw that whole expression in some parentheses
and dot yourself away, let's go.
- That's right.
- Let's dot our way on over to exercise seven of the many.
And let's just talk about long, medium and short taxi rides.
Tell us, we can only talk so much about the code,
but let's talk a bit about it and give people,
like I said, I wanna expose people to
what are some of the problems and aspects of pandas
that you can use to solve them.
- Sure, so one of my favorite data sets to work with
is New York City taxi information.
It's like everyone can identify with it, you understand it.
And so this exercise uses a very small subset of that.
Maybe we'll talk next about the pandemic taxis,
which is a much larger one,
but this is just 100,000, no, 10,000,
10,000 taxi rides from like five years ago, six years ago.
And the question is, well, how can we divide up this data set
which tells us how long, how far,
how much people paid, when they were picked up, all that information.
How can we find out the distance that they went and categorize that?
And the reason that this can be useful is we so often have numeric data
that we need to put into categories, right?
What are best sellers?
What are poor sellers who are the most employee of the year?
That sort of thing.
There's so many places where turning something into a category will be useful.
And so it's very tempting to think, okay, I'll do some if statements.
or I'll do some for statements.
But actually, Pandas provides us with pd.cut,
which just does it for us.
And this is one of those examples of once you learn it,
you're like, oh, wow, I get it.
I don't have to have, oh yeah, I even have here.
Like you might think you would want to say,
let's set all the categories to be medium.
And then where it's less than two miles,
we'll call it short.
And where it's greater than 10 miles, we'll call it long.
But you can just say pd.cut.
We're going to cut it two.
We're going to cut a 10.
Anything less than two is short.
Anything greater than 10 is long.
Anything in the middle is medium.
Done.
And PDDOT gets back a new series.
So the way you're doing it is you're setting everything to medium,
and then you're defining short and you're defining long instead of defining the three categories.
So that's like the sort of you might think this would be a good way to do it.
And it works, right?
As I like to say in my courses, unfortunately, this works.
Right?
so so you will get the right answer this way but if you then like pay pay go the next page here
you'll see that you can just use pd cut um uh yeah and then you just say here are the bins
here are the labels go um and this goes back to that thing we talked about like looping over stuff
versus just going this is what i want you to do do it a hundred percent deep down inside the best you
can. Don't bother me. Just figure it out for me. That's exactly right. And this means that like
a whole lot of people have worked on PD cut and have made it work efficiently, way more efficiently
than you or I could do in our code. Presumably, right? It's not going to be any worse. And it'll
probably be a lot better. The other thing is you get back and you can see it sorted at the end.
like the output of the series you get here.
So you feed it a series and you get back a series.
But then the series looks at first glance,
like it's a bunch of strings.
So you're going to have short or short,
medium, medium, long, long, long, but it's actually not strings.
It's actually a category,
which is a pandas version of an enum.
So really it's very small because it's
just integers being stored there.
And then those integers are associated with strings.
So that's an example of like where they have thought through it.
And they basically said, yeah,
we're going to make this more efficient than you would
to do on your own. Right. Awesome. Well, I would, you know, to be honest, I've been happy if I came
up with that first solution, just using lock and set it in there. That's pretty cool. But this,
this cuts is super nice. Yeah. Just to find the boundaries with as bins and then right off it goes.
Right. And there's an option there include lowest. And so I actually didn't know about this for a
while. So I'd be like, okay, so, so think about the bins has to be from some, some, you know,
some small number to some large number and the question is then well wait a second what about
that leftmost bin what about that like if it's up to and not including it's like less than but not
less than equal then how do i do it so i would always be like well i'll take the min i'll do like
the series dot min minus one and then it's guaranteed to be lower than that but no it turns
out the pandas developers thought about this long before i did and there's an option a keyword
argument you can pass include lowest equals true done now it's less than an equal as opposed to just
less than right because all these kind of things the boundary conditions are always tricky
especially on floating points right oh yes oh yes there's probably at least two spacecrafts that
have crashed because of this all right the next one we want to go to is number 12.
finding outliers yeah so you know it's this is not a book about statistics and i'm not an expert
in statistics but there are a whole lot of statistical ideas that permeate working with
pandas and so it's like you know mean standard deviation median understanding sort of how they
can differ from one another right and especially the whole mean versus median thing where it's so
easy to have a few outliers pull your data up or pull your data down and then sort of fool you.
And so often people want to find the opposite. And I've certainly found this, especially with
corporate training with like cybersecurity people, where they're like, we are always looking for
outliers. Like, you know, who was the user who was logging in at unusual times? And so
You logged in from 20 IP addresses in one minute.
That's right.
That's not a good person.
They're not good.
I'm going to tell you just that right now.
They just try to be very, very effective.
Multitasking.
And so this finding outliers is, okay, let's find out then not who was sort of normal, but
like who was abnormal, right?
Who was exhibiting unusual behavior.
And so here it's like, okay, let's take our set of numbers and let's find out who was more than one standard deviation,
I can't remember if it's one or two, above the mean or below the mean.
And let's just find those values and ignore the sort of normal values.
And then we can talk a little about IQR, the inter-portile range, which is a standard statistical idea that we don't talk about enough, even though it's super useful.
People came up with these ideas a long time ago.
Oh, here's a fun fact.
John Tukey, who came up with a lot of these ideas, he also invented the word bit in computers.
Oh, wow.
Okay.
So, yeah, I was like, wow, what a guy.
So, you can see here then that, like, I'm going to take the, you know, trip distance.
Let's find, you know, trip distance.
Let's find where the trip distance is less than the trip distance at the first, you know, first quartile minus one and a half times the IQR.
Right?
Meaning, let's take the distance between the first quartile and the third quartile.
That's our interquartile range.
That gives us a sense of like, where is the bulk, where are the bulk of the numbers?
And let's find out who is below that or who is above that.
And so it's not surprising that if we're looking for taxi distances, you're not going to have
a lot of outliers that are very low because you can't go below zero miles in your taxi.
But you can go very high.
You can go very large.
And so looking for those trips that are greater than the 75th percentile plus one and a half times the IQR, we actually find, you know, I see here in front of me, you know, about 1,800 taxi rides out of the 10,000.
So about 19% of the taxi rides are much, much longer than the mean ride.
And you can use this, then you can imagine people in like the New York City Taxi Limousine Commission saying, oh, we can use this to plan, to charge, to, you know, send taxis to different places.
or have a special program for long distance stuff or whatever yeah right or if you're uber you know
where to play because they actually used to have the geogra the longitude latitude of where people
were picked up and dropped off and they got rid of that and i'm sure both for privacy reasons and
because uber and lyft can look at that data and say oh well we know now when to send cars where
and then well although while true i imagine that that data has been
downloaded and archived with geolocation.
Oh, yeah.
For certain people, right?
You can still get all that old data.
It's just the newer stuff that they don't do.
They still do my neighborhood.
I also wonder how precise that longitudinal latitude was.
You could probably identify which home was going to which other home.
And I can only imagine how that would look.
Yeah, now you're getting into a problem.
Yeah, now you're getting into a shady spot.
or certain types of establishments, you know, that could be fraught with consequences for the people whose home you've already identified where they were picked up at or all sorts of stuff.
Exactly.
All right. Fair. Fair.
That's way more important than whether Uber can lease their vehicles strategically, you know?
Right. Right.
And they might have some data on their own, too, you know?
Nice.
Okay, so you can use this IQR,
under quartile range feature to pull that out here, right?
Right, right.
And we can pull that out and then do simple multiplication.
Right at the end of the day,
what we're doing is we're pulling out this data
and then just doing very, very simple statistical analysis of it.
Just to sort of say, how many outliers do we have?
How many low outliers?
How many high outliers?
And you can see this, like, at the end of the day,
it's not that complicated in terms of math.
Sometimes people are like, well, how much math do I have to know to learn this stuff?
I'm like, I can get through it.
I promise you.
Not that much.
It's not that hard.
A few basic ideas and you're basically set.
Yeah, very cool.
All right, on to the next one, which is pandemic taxis.
That's a different kind of taxi.
So this was actually, so the two studies we looked at so far were with my tiny little
10,000 taxi ride sample from a few years ago. I then took taxi rides from January and July of 2019
and 2020. So four months there. And the question was, I think I actually only looked at July in
this exercise. Yeah, July 2019, July 2020, comparing taxi rides. Now, just to remind you,
July 2020, not a great time for tourism in New York City or anywhere else. And so the question
was what differences do we see between July 2019 and July 2020? How much did it go down in terms of
taxi use? How much less did people pay? And then my favorite part of this was, did people use cash
more in 2020 or less in 2020? And so you see, first of all, it's like a decline of something
like 80% in terms of taxi rides from 2019 to 2020. Again, not a huge surprise to anyone who lived
the pandemic and like saw what was going on then and so my gut feeling was well no one wanted to
touch anyone else or touch anything that anyone else had touched so clearly people would have used
credit cards much more and no it turns out they used like there's that screen reuben you got to
touch the okay that drove me crazy during the pandemic it's like i'm gonna just do touch list
and then you like sign it are you okay you're like i never thought of that i guess in israel like we
you just like you know do the tapping of your car you didn't have to sign anything but huh yeah
the us they're like oh hit okay to confirm it's like okay i thought we could just escape me
touching this disease ridden thing but no also you have to like indicate how much of a tip you want
to leave but that's a whole separate exactly yeah uh we're at the um i don't know the car wash don't
you want to tip the car no i don't want to tip the car wash that's the other thing is you should
have looked at tips like that could have been interesting actually i think oh i did i think no
i think i did i definitely looked at tips but i can't remember what it was like that like around
the pandemic yeah because i know a lot of people gave tips to like kind of say thanks and i was
wondering if that would show up you know like thanks for being out here amongst the diseased
so it turns out that people used cash more during the pandemic than credit and i i like raises with
with my family and I was like, what the heck? I think it was my sister who said, well, everyone
who would use, like the people who were sort of higher income earners who use their credit cards
more, they were staying home. It's the people who like were forced to go to work, who use cash more,
who were taking the taxis because they didn't want to take the subway. Like there's like a sort of an
in-between sort of thing. So you get all these like wild pieces of data and analysis that you can do.
And here it was not just like pulling out all this data, but one of the big things was also, I want to read in a lot of data.
I want to read in from two different CSV files.
Now what do I do?
Right?
Because it's very obvious.
You read in a CSV file, you get a data frame.
You read another CSV file, you get a data frame.
But I want to treat those as one.
And I want to then be able to distinguish between them.
How do I do that?
And so sure enough, Pandas has a concat method.
And I use concat now all the time.
I read in multiple CSV files into multiple data frames.
I concat them together and you concat them either horizontally or vertically,
depending on what you want to do.
And this comes back to-
I see if their columns are the same,
then you might do it vertically.
That's right.
But if you want to augment it potentially,
because now we have the sale percentage data,
but it goes along with the columns exactly.
Precisely.
And so another, like, and a nice way to do this also is not just read this one and read that one, but you can use a list comprehension with something like glob, right?
So glob.glob on star.csv, get back a list of data frames and then just hand that to pd.concat.
And so that's where knowing Python and be able to pull that out and use those techniques can really, really come in handy.
Yeah.
Earlier you mentioned, I want to go back to it real quick.
You mentioned that learn Python first and then pandas.
a lot of times when I think learn Python, I think, okay, well, learn the language and then learn
the standard library to a good degree. And then begin to chop away at the half million things on
PyPI that are interesting, you know, and it's like a never ending sort of thing. And then there's,
of course, this joke, like I learned Python, it was a good weekend or something like that, right?
Like, how do you, how do you square these two things? But I feel like the amount of Python that
you need to learn is mostly centered around the language and really is actually not that much.
And then you kind of learn the pandas way, right? Theoretically, if you wanted to.
Right, right. For sure. Look, I am a big fan of objects and classes and all that stuff. But when
I'm talking to people who specifically want to use Python for data analytics with pandas,
I say to them, objects will help you, but they're not going to be crucial. Like if there's a part
of the course that you want to sort of drop to save some money, save some time, then that's
a place where we can save because the odds of an analyst using pandas writing their own
classes are pretty slim.
I think it'll give them some perspective on how these classes work, but I don't think
that like they need to learn that.
So, and like a lot of the standard library there, it's hard to say, right?
So as I said, I love glob, right?
Globbing is fantastic.
But that's definitely not in like my intro class.
I'm not going to say, oh, by the way.
Yeah, I would bet there's probably 10 modules that if you knew, you might not need to learn more for six months, you know, doing Jupyter Pandas type of work, right? Like path lib and a couple of things like that, right?
That's right. That's right.
Yeah. I mean, I just made a number.
It's mostly like just being able to sort of work with the core data structures, understanding the syntax and how it works, and even like defining some simple functions.
I think most people using pandas are not at the end going to define functions.
Although, as I've gone on with my use of pandas, I see, you know, lambda, this is where it's at.
Like knowing how to use it really, really helps.
So there I do sort of go back with the pandas people.
I'm like, okay, this is going to be super weird.
We're going to talk about anonymous functions now.
And then I typically do that with the more advanced pandas groups, not with the introductory ones.
But if you can sort of wrap your mind around that, then it does help quite a bit.
It does.
So it takes what would be multiple step things and lets you turn it into one of those changed expressions.
Because instead of defining a function somewhere else, you can just put it in line as part of a lambda and just keep on going, you know?
That's right.
And the fact that – so it's especially useful, I find.
we mentioned dot lock earlier so dot lock allows you to choose rows let's start with that and so
i can pass it um a lambda and that lambda then gets the data frame you're working on as an argument
and then whatever it returns if it returns a boolean series then it allows you to filter well you can
then have multiple dot locks and multiple lambdas in a row to do successive filtering and yes that
is less efficient than doing it all in one fell swoop but boy oh boy it's easier to think about
and it's easier to use so you just like whittle it down whittle it down whittle it down each line
with its own lambda um and so understanding how to do that understanding why it's important that
the lambda inside the lambda you're using the temporary parameter from the lambda as opposed
to the overall variable for your data frame because you're chaining it that's useful as well
Well, 100%, then you can also comment out certain lines at the end and see what the
intermediate values are.
And so you say it's less efficient.
It's less computationally efficient.
It might be more efficient as a human being trying to understand what the heck is happening,
right?
That is spot on.
I often tell people that I think Python is a language for an age in which computers are
are cheap and people are expensive.
- Yes.
- Because like, right, our efficiency is the big bottleneck
in terms of time, in terms of money.
So right, if it takes my computer a few seconds more,
who the heck cares?
And if-
- My M2 Pro doesn't care if it's like,
you know, a tiny bit more, I don't care.
- That's right, that's right.
- Or my cluster of GPUs, take your pick.
Although at that point, it starts to cost real money
to earn those things, you know?
- Right, but still, I mean, depending on,
Look, if you see that your computation is taking a long time, okay.
So then you sort of find that and you improve that.
Yeah, that's a really good point.
Like a lot of things are, don't worry about that until it's actually going to become a problem.
It looks low.
Turns out it's probably a blink of an eye.
All right, let's keep moving on.
We're getting short on time and we have a plethora of things to work with.
I kind of want to go to wine words.
Wine words.
Oh.
All right.
let me remember what exercise that is that is 37 all right yeah so so people think of pandas
not wrongly as being great at working with numbers but it turns out that it's fantastic
working with two other kinds of data data types one is strings and one is dates and times and you
can get a ton a ton out of analysis working with these if you know how to work with it so um there
is i forget where it is like there's a machine learning um like uh like archive of data data
sets and one of them is 150 000 wine reviews from wine magazine and so i said okay is it kaggle maybe
or is it somewhere else i i think kaggle has a version of it but i think it's elsewhere
wine mag 150 000 reviews okay i don't know i'll find out where it is anyway so so i said okay
let's find out right because you you drink a bottle of wine and you read the back and you sort
of like you know roll your eyes at what they've written although although i put in a plug i read
this fantastic book a few years ago called cork dork uh by this uh journalist who decided to become
a sommelier and she took the exam and her journey toward there she was and she convinced me these
words actually have real meaning and people are very serious about it so i i will not roll my eyes
price much anymore but my thoughts of nutmeg but they're troubling yes
so the question was okay what about these reviews of wine what words are people using
and are they using certain words more with california wines and certain words more with
french wines or certain words more with red or with white or rose and so we can then take this text
break it apart and search for it.
We can search for it using plain old Panda stuff.
We can search for it using regular expressions,
which it has built in and works very well.
Here, so let's see,
some analysis on the words.
Here, so what are the 10 most common words for red wines?
How do we do that?
Well, we have to take the description and break it apart.
If you're used to using just plain old Python,
you're like, "Oh, well,
I guess I'll break that into a list."
But now what? Now I have a series of lists.
Now what do I do?
And so one of the key methods to know here is something called explode.
And explode is let's take a series of lists and turn that into a very, very, very long series.
And so basically each element in the list becomes an element in the series and they all share an index.
So you know where they're originally from.
And then, you know, the world's your oyster.
So you can get rid of punctuation, right?
So I have a S dot stir lower.
Okay, so we lowercase everything.
Then dot stir split, and we split into a list.
Then we say explode, get into a long series.
Then we once again run strip, getting rid of punctuation.
And now we can use is in, which is yet another fantastic pandas method to say,
are these words in, like find the lines where these words are located.
And then we can just do a value counts.
Definitely my favorite method.
How often does this thing show up?
And then we use head.
Ta-da, we've got the 10 most common words there.
And when you break it down like that.
The value count sorts probably most common to least common, right?
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
So value counts, not only does it count how often something shows up,
but exactly, it sorts it from most common to least common.
So then you just-
So then head is-
Yeah, if you want, yeah, however much you take there,
and then that's the one.
Those are the popular ones.
That's right.
So here I have the page we're looking at.
So we get find where the country is France.
So that's the row selector.
And we want the comp selector to be description.
So we only want the description.
And then we have our function top 10 words, which did what I just described.
We're going to take these common wine words, lowercase them, get rid of punctuation, so
forth, pass it in.
And we get back our top words and we find out what words are used to, you know, are associated
with French wines as opposed to California wines and so on and so forth.
Excellent.
Yeah.
Very, very cool example.
All right.
we i think we got time for two more to go through do you want to pick two that are popular uh
to me let's see let's see let's do uh maybe 32 multi-city actually yeah oh you don't actually
all right yeah you mentioned tipping before oh you're gonna open up a whole
this is gonna be a whole thing best tippers number 42 let's go
No, no, no judgment here, folks. All right. So the question is like, so we'll try to understand
as everybody here, when people tip their taxi drivers more generously. All right. So the question
was, did they tip better? And we looked at 2019 before the pandemic in January and July. So do they
tip more in the winter or do they tip more in the summer? And so this involves several things. First
things that Pandas is just amazing at that people are not aware of all the flexibility you have
there. Another thing is how easy it is to create a new column, right? So we spoke before a bit how
you can use broadcasting to just multiply. I have a column multiplied by something or a column adding
to another column, but you can create a new column just by assigning to it. Again, it's sort of like
assigning to a dictionary. It just then is there. And so you can calculate the percentage that people
tip put that in a new column and then say well let's now group by the month and let's find out
what percentage the mean or the max or the exactly exactly yeah okay um and we can find out like you
know whether people tip more on average in january or in july i honestly don't remember what the
answer is um which which which will uh hopefully uh uh not tick off too many uh uh readers here we
go let's see what it said oh here we go go back one page there so 32 of taxi riders in new york
don't tip at all that's right that was a surprising thing to me um and then i don't remember exactly
what it was the different months yeah and you know you're talking summer versus winter there's
probably a tourism angle versus non locals versus tourists i mean i know people go to new york and
not in the summer but not as much i imagine that's right that's right they're a little colder there
factors that that like you know come into it yeah one of the things kind of takeaways i'm feeling
as we were talking about all these is like there's a lot of interesting questions that can be asked
and answered really quickly for like sociology and urban planning and all kinds of interesting
questions that don't feel like programmer questions yes so so you know i i mean i talked to a lot of
people, you probably do too, who are interested in advancing their careers with Python. And they're
like, well, I don't have a computer science background. Can I get a job as a programmer?
And their vision of a programmer is either someone working at a startup or at one of the big
companies, Google, Amazon, Facebook, and so forth. And I say to them, look, there are an awful lot of
people who have great jobs working at supermarket chains and insurance companies in the backroom
analyzing data and they are crucial, but we don't think of them as programmers and in governments
and in cities and weather forecasting. Everyone nowadays is using data and collecting and
analyzing it and having these skills either gives you abilities to do your job better or gives you
the ability to move into a new job that you couldn't have done before that these places are
desperately looking to fill. Yeah, I totally agree. I can't remember which episode it was.
I didn't name it right.
So there's an episode I did quite a while ago about R programmers and R data scientists
and Python data scientists working together.
And I think it was the research arm of Kroger maybe that had like 200 data scientists.
Wow.
That's a proper group of data scientists.
I mean, a lot of times data scientists, I feel like there's a couple of them for a company
compared to a software team or something.
No, and I tell people also, it's worth learning to write and it's worth learning to speak,
not because you're going to be a Pulitzer Prize winning writer, not because you're going to be
whatever prize you would get for speaking well, just because having these skills makes you more
effective at your job. And people who can write a program to suck up some data, analyze it, and
come back with a result, especially if it's a public data set that has something to do
with what they're working on,
they are so much more valuable to their company
than they would have been otherwise.
Oh, yeah.
Absolutely.
So I found it because I have a search engine on Talk Python
that searches the transcripts.
Woo-hoo!
On top of everything else.
If you want to know something, people,
about historical shows, when you hit search,
it's not just like the show notes.
So Scaling Data Science Across Python and R,
episode 236 with Ethan Swan, Bradley, Bokme,
and the company is 84.51 degrees.
Oh, I've seen their thing before.
Yeah, that's what it was.
People can check that out if they're interested.
Very, very cool.
Yeah, super cool.
Okay, last one.
What are we doing?
Let's do cities.
Cities.
What number is it?
43.
So I found a few years ago
this JSON file
containing the thousand largest cities in the United States.
So first of all, like good to work with JSON
because people need to know how to work with that kind of data.
Second of all, okay, let's not look at the numbers so much
as let's do some plotting.
And so I'm going to like make enemies now.
I really cannot handle Matplotlib.
I find it, it's like so incredibly powerful.
And anytime I want to do even the tiniest thing with it,
I have to look up the documentation and remind myself how it works.
Maybe it's because I don't use it enough.
And so I just use the pandas interface for plotting 95% of the time.
Let's call it 90% of the time.
The rest of the time I usually use Seaborn.
So I said, okay, let's see if we can do some plotting here of these largest cities.
So for example, let's see growth in Pennsylvania cities.
Like which cities in Pennsylvania?
Oh, I'm sorry.
Like let's see a dual bar plot.
How many large cities are in each state?
Okay, well, that's a group by, right?
So you have to know how to do grouping.
You have to know what you're grouping on and how to use count as opposed to mean, right?
That count even exists.
But then if I want to see a bar plot where it's sorted from smallest to largest,
you got to know how to do sorting.
And then we can do a bar plot.
So sure enough, you do a dot plot dot bar on your series, kablam, you have a bar plot right there.
And you just get it in like, you know, it's nicely sorted there.
Quick takeaways.
Holy cow, does California have more big cities than I realized?
And where's New York and New Jersey?
It's way down the line.
You think of those as having pretty mechatropolis-type places.
Massachusetts.
That's right.
But it's how many cities.
Right.
So, right.
All right.
That's like the fun.
So, keep going.
So, do a bar plot of growth in Pennsylvania.
So, how are we going to do that?
Well, wait a second.
If we want to do growth, it's a percentage.
But it's written in the JSON as number and then percent sign.
That's a string.
So we're going to have to get rid of the percent sign.
And then we're going to have to change the D type from string to a floating point.
And then we can sort it.
And then we can graph it.
So the S type, changing the D type basically is a deep down inside of pandas parse as an integer operation, right?
Rather than looping over and parsing or whatever.
Yeah.
Like basically, I mean, it has to do the looping.
It's doing the looping there at, you know, I like to say below C level.
Or whatever.
Yeah.
Below C level.
down by the dead sea i see okay um and so you see here like this bar plot now we have a whole bunch
of cities that have gone down in size and a bunch of things going up in size and pandas is very happy
to you know show show the bar plot there um you know again sorted so that we see it from the
greatest uh sort of shrinkage to the greatest growth right with pitch pittsburgh having the most
shrinkage and allentown having the most growth i would not guess that
And I would not have either given that like my sister-in-law and brother-in-law live in Allentown and they're like, oh, Allentown.
Actually, I think that's a common thing that people think there, even though it seems like a perfectly great place to be.
Yeah, sure.
Funny.
Awesome.
Well, there's a lot of quick takeaways for this.
One more.
Let me just show you one more.
Go to the last one here in this exercise.
Okay.
So one of the most important types of plots you can do in data analysis is a scatter plot.
And you take your data frame and you say, give me the plot based on the x-axis should be this, the y-axis should be that.
Well, if we do a scatter plot based on longitude and latitude of the thousand largest U.S. cities, you basically come up with a map of the U.S.
Yeah, how interesting.
The other thing that you realize, California is technically bigger than a lot of other states.
So that also counts for Hawaii.
Oh, yes.
Yeah.
Interesting.
But there's a lot of people in California.
It's a good place to be.
There are a lot of people there for sure.
If they're willing to pay the sunshine tax, it's nice.
Cool.
All right, Reuben.
This is really, really excellent.
I know you want to give a shout out to a couple of exercises from Bamboo Weekly.
So I'll include those in the show notes as well.
And people can like take those and jump over and look at them as well.
That's fine.
That's great.
Yeah.
No, we went through a lot here just during this time.
That's fine.
Yeah, for sure.
As I've discovered, like there's basically, I mean, there is,
there's an infinite number of these sorts of things that you can do
and different permutations of various sorts.
I mean, we didn't even talk about like, you know, multi-indexing,
which opens up literally a whole new dimension of this stuff.
But it's great fun.
It's great, great fun.
Yeah.
And a lot of the Pandas 2 stuff coming on changes the foundation and opens up more possibilities still.
Absolutely.
All right.
Well, final thoughts.
Final call to action.
What do we got here?
What do you say?
Well, call to action, I mean, you can take a look at, like, I guess my overall courses and so forth at LearnerPython.com.
Or if you just want to improve your Pandas knowledge, you can look at BambooWeekly.com, the newsletter there.
Does it cost money or does it just cost an email?
So it is a paid newsletter,
but the first two questions and answers every week are free.
So like it's usually between five and nine questions each week.
But even if you don't pay,
I still want people to get some Pandas learning improvement practice
so they can totally do that.
Excellent.
Yeah.
All right.
And check out the book, obviously.
Oh yeah, that too.
Pandasworkout.com.
Cool.
hold this up here. Yeah, it's actually pretty thick. It is.
At the end, I was like, Oh, that's why it took a long time.
Also procrastination. But you know, yeah. But I'd love to hear
from people if they have, I always love to hear like, you
know, sort of interesting problems, data sets, issues that
people are experiencing, just so I can sort of figure out what
what are the next directions for me to explore that I can then
try to help people with as well.
Awesome. Well, I appreciate all your help coming on the show, sharing your knowledge and just riffing on pandas together. It was a lot of fun.
Excellent. My great pleasure.
Yeah. Bye.
All right. Bye bye.